---
title: "I made a Sokoban clone"
date: "Wed, 24 Jan, 2018"
layout: post
tags: gamedev lua C SWIG
---

At the start of 2018 I was sleeping on a friend's couch, waiting until I was
able to move into a new place. It was stressful for everyone. In typical fashion,
I threw myself into a programming project to fight the depression and anxiety.

And it worked this time. I had built up enough of a codebase in `toast`, a small
collection of C libraries I've been writing for game jam projects, that I could
actually make something, and finish it, in a reasonable amount of time.

## SWIG ##

The primary catalyst was finding [SWIG](http://www.swig.org/).
I had looked for a Lua binding
generator on many previous occasions, and each time, I was disappointed to
find utilities written only for C++. A stackoverflow thread led me to
SWIG, which 1) works great for C,  2) can generate bindings for most popular
scripting languages, not just Lua ,and 3) is highly configurable.

In a few hours, SWIG was integrated into my build process and `toast` was fully
accessible in Lua. There were a couple kinks--SWIG doesn't understand `typedefs`,
so in the SWIG pass, `typedef'd` fundamental types are `#defined` instead.

Furthermore, a lot of my math library stuff is written as functional macros.
Naturally, these don't have enough implicit data for SWIG to figure out bindings
for them. So I wrote a file, just for SWIG, defining C functions to wrap my
macros, which SWIG then wraps to Lua with prettier names. Yes, that is convoluted.
No, it isn't pretty. Example:

```c
double _macro_clamp (float v, float a, float b)
{
    return clamp(v,a,b);
}
```

## A Test Project ##

I am primarily a C programmer. I don't have extensive Lua experience, but I like
the language a lot--it is easy to play in. I wanted to build a test project with
`toast` to help it mature. Real usage finds bugs better than myopic test cases.

With Lua integration in place, I could quickly poop out whatever I chose, so I
chose Sokoban. As a kid I played a Mac OS 9 clone of the game called
"Sloppy Sokoban" and enjoyed it a lot. Sokoban is a simple game, with simple
rules, so it was a good fit for testing.


## Beginnings ##

I wrote sokoban.cpp, which contained all the init, input bindings, and frame timing.
It calls 3 Lua hooks, `_init()`, `_update()`, and `_render()` as needed. Literally
every other bit of the game is written in Lua (I got carried away with the convenience).


## Parsing Levels ##

I took some of my old pixel art, from a prototype 2D platformer about ducks,
and a font from another unfinished project, this one a shmup _a la_
[Deimos Rising](https://www.ambrosiasw.com/games/dr/),
and set to work to get something on the screen.

While researching Sokoban, I discovered that the cult classic had spawned a
still-thriving online community of clones, levels, solution videos, etc. There
is a semi-standard format for sokoban levels, which takes 2 forms: a block of
ASCII characters, or a somewhat-compressed block of ASCII characters. You can
read about the format [here.](http://sokobano.de/wiki/index.php?title=Level_format)

I also found repositories of level collections, with levels from the original
games in addition to thousands of player-created ones. I nabbed a few levels to
test with, and started writing my parser.

It is at this point that I learned something important: parsing a text file,
character by character, sucks in Lua. Also, spaces are a token in the Sokoban
level format (sigh).

In Lua, the only way to get a character from a string is as a _substring_,
and the only way to compare `char` values is by calling `string.byte(str, i,j)`.
Eesh. Could I have written the parser in C, letting SWIG bind it? Yes. But I
wanted to try doing it "the Lua way", and never changed it thereafter because it
worked fine.

Loaded boards were left as a table of 1-character strings, rather than making
a "tile" structure with more data.


## Better Artwork ##

At this point, I decided I didn't want all my walls and boxes (bread) to look
the same, so I made some variants in Aseprite. To apply them, I didn't want to
add data to the level files, nor did I want to add a lot of data to loaded levels.

So, each level string is hashed naively, and its hash is used to seed Lua's RNG.
Then, to draw the board, the seed is reapplied each frame, and the renderer
chooses a random variant from the list for each tile, thus keeping them identical
between renders.

A problem arose: now each piece of bread needs to remember which graphic it uses.
Bread can be moved, meaning it will receive a different graphic from the RNG when
pushed. So loaded levels then had data added for each bread's identity.


## Mechanics ##

Implementing the actual rules of Sokoban was a breeze, since it is basically a
board game.


## Animation ##

Early on, I used coroutines to make tweens. In the end, most of the animation
in the game was simple enough, with little enough state, that I simply wrote the
code inline.

So, amusingly, player movement uses coroutine tweening, while the new highscore
cutscene with particle systems does _not_.


## Managing Screens ##

About halfway through the project, I realized that the game had become too complex
for me to manage everything with a long chain of `if`s in `_update()` and `_render()`.

So, I implemented a Lua "class" called Screen, from which each screen in the game
inherits some stub methods and flags. Then, I made a simple stack, which holds
Screens and manages them.

Only the top screen on the stack is updated.

For rendering, screens can be "blocking" or "non-blocking". This was done to
facilitate cutscenes and menus. Each frame, the stack provides a list of screens
to be rendered. The first screen in the list will be the first "blocking" screen
from the top of the stack, followed by any "non-blocking" screens above it.

So, for example, the "new highscore" screen is a cutscene which is drawn over the
"level won" screen.


## Transitions ##

There is one transition Screen, which is controlled with `transition:start(...)`.
You specify whether you want to transition 'out' or 'in', and optionally may
provide a callback function to be run when the transition completes. This
method pushes the transition screen onto the screen stack, and pops it automatically
upon completion.

To transition to a new screen looks something like this:

```lua
transition:start('out', function()
    screen.pop() -- remove the current screen, for example
    screen.push(newscr)
    transition:start('in')
end)
```

## Lua Binding Bindings ##

C integration is cool, but I ended up writing a lot of repeated code to use
integrated functions and datatypes in Sokoban, with many opportunities for
incorrect usage on my part.

I fixed this problem by abstracting various pieces of `toast` interface in Lua
in ways specific to the game's needs. A good example of this is in playing sound
effects: I wrote a Lua function to look up a sound effect by name in the game's
table of SFX assets and play it back through `toast`, supplying default arguments
and whatnot.

This practice turned code like this:

```lua
if toast.btn(toast.btn_start).state == toast_ButtonPressed 
    or toast.key_GetState(--[[some input I'm trying out]]) == 1 
then
    local u = sfx['foo.wav'].handle
    toast.mix_PlayChunk(toast.SoundMixer, u, 1, 1, 0)
end
```

into code like this:

```lua
if input.Start() then audio.playSE('foo') end
```

With the added benefit of better error-checking, since I only had to type it _once_
in the wrapper.


## Toast Evolution ##

Throughout the course of making my Sokoban clone, I uncovered bugs in `toast`,
as I had hoped I would. Subimages were pitched wrong. Alpha blend was busted.
Some of my SWIG configuration needed fixing. I found problems like these by
using my own libs intuitively for actual work, with real expectations.

As usual, I should have followed a programming saw more diligently:

<p id="center"> <strong>"Always write the usage code first!"</strong> </p>

I also took some breaks from Sokoban to write new utilities: `paq_aseprite.h`,
an `stb_image`-style library for loading Aseprite project files directly,
and `paq_wav.h`, a naive .WAV file loader (16bit PCM WAVs only, for the moment).

My Aseprite decoder isn't used in Sokoban, but I had wanted something like it
on numerous previous projects, and I knew I would want something like it again
on upcoming ones.

My WAV loader is used for all the SFX, and was written out of frustration.
I previously used only `stb_vorbis` to load my audio, meaning that any
audio I wanted to use needed to be an .ogg file... Meaning that to even _test_
a sound effect, I first needed to convert it from a .wav to an .ogg. Loading a WAV
file in the most trivial case (which I could assure for myself) is pretty
straightforward, so I spent a couple of hours adding it in.

I also made a little .NET program to conveniently browse and copy/rename .wav files,
which proved to be a lifesaver when sifting through SFX libraries.


## The Future of Toast ##

Building an actual game with `toast` helped me fix some of its bugs, but it also
made me realize that a _lot_ of its libraries aren't very user-friendly, despite
my best efforts. They also contain inconsistencies and other issues.

So, before `toast` ever sees the light of day I intend to rework most of it into
something more palatable. I will likely remove "convenient" dependences between
modules, for example, to make each one _actually_ be self-contained. I will likely
turn most `toast` modules into `paq_*.h` libraries, which will be able to stand alone.


## Ok, Where's the Game? ##

You can pick it up on [itch.io](https://pennie.itch.io/duckoban)


## References ##

- [SWIG](http://www.swig.org/)
- ["Sok" format](http://sokobano.de/wiki/index.php?title=Level_format)
- [Aseprite](https://aseprite.org)
- [stb libraries](https://github.com/nothings/stb)
- [paq libraries](https://github.com/pennie-quinn/paq)
- [luaJIT](http://luajit.org/)
