---
title: "My Konmari Experience 2: Books, Papers, & Mementos"
date: "Sun, Oct 28, 2018"
layout: post
---

Lately, I've been working on "Putting my house in order" as prescribed by Marie Kondo in [_The Life Changing Magic of Tidying Up_](https://amzn.to/2yKsBll). Last time, we talked about clothes and gifts. You can read that post [here]({% post_url 2018-10-27-konmari-1 %}). I spent the weekend going through my books, papers, and mementos.

$index{min_depth=2}

## Books
### Books, Unread
Of the books on my shelf, at least half remain unread. The Konmari way to handle this is to get rid of them. Marie reasons that, if you _really_ want to read the book, you will buy it again. _Ha, no._ My alternative is this: Make a list of all the unread books on your shelf. You aren't allowed to get any more books until the list is empty. Whether you read the books or get rid of them, the problem will be solved.

### Books Read
Of these, I only kept the books which will definitely be read _again_. I realized that some books I had kept since middle school were not sentimental at all--I kept them because of perceived rarity, only. I could never replace them, but would I want to? The answer was "No, not really." Other books kept were reference manuals, which I prefer to online docs, despite how quickly they become obsolete. My rationale for these is that I will discard them when their information is no longer relevant to any work I do.

### Journals
I divided journals further into "used" and "unused" categories. Used journals contained diary entries, reminders, and drawings. Lightly used journals were briefly examined: personal information was removed, some drawings were scanned. Then, I discarded them. Most of these journals were less than one 3rd filled, and had been abandoned either out of depression, because they were inconvenient to use, or because they had become buried in my clutter and forgotten. Pristine journals were examined carefully and were only kept if I could _promise_ myself that they would be used. Several filled journals were kept.

### _Calvin and Hobbes_
I have collected _Calvin and Hobbes_ books since I could barely read. My dad introduced me to the comic, and much of my vocabulary and sense of humor was derived from it. I decided to keep all of these. Additionally, I would like to read a _Calvin and Hobbes_ occasionally.

Ideally, I would be able to pull from a database of selected comics each day, and display the strips matching the month and day when I logged into my machine--like a morning newspaper. At present, I haven't found any software to do so. There used to be a Mac Dashboard widget--oh joy.


## Papers
Among the important things, like leases and birth certificates, were records of bills paid, pay checks, and doctor visits from _six years ago_. I have never once needed to use these documents, so they were discarded. Course notes were collected into a sorted pile to be scanned and Google Doc'd. I don't refer back to these, but friends have approached me for old course notes in the past, and I may need to refresh myself if I begin tutoring again in the future.


## Miscellany
Various items were found in various places, many of them inexplicable. My dad's old library card, tucked in a box of K'nex toys--how, even? I shook out one of my bags, and a small shower of loose change and emergency tampons ensued. Change went into my wallet, per Konmari. Tampons went back to the box under the sink. The library card went in the trash. Astute readers may wonder why a trans woman needs tampons: I keep them around because ~40% of _other_ humans use them regularly, and might forget to bring any to class or my apartment.

## So Many Boxes
Since moving into my apartment, I have slowly accumulated a layer of Amazon boxes beneath my bed. Some were holdovers from my previous apartment, never unpacked. Others were from more recent orders, kept "in case I need them". Finally, all these boxes were emptied, and most were recycled.


## Mementos
Throughout discarding, I had already disposed of several items that would be classified as "mementos". A book of short stories written by my 8th grade English class--except me, because I was so anxious about the story being printed that I could never write something I was satisfied with. Various holiday cards I never looked at again. There remained a good amount of mementos to deal with: a box of miscellaneous "baby" items, a very heavy tote of childhood books and drawings, etc.

Most of these items languished indefinitely in my parents' attic until I moved away, and then, they were relegated to the bottom of my closet. They took up loads of space, they were difficult to move, and I only handled any of them _once every several years_.

Still, to merely throw the boxes away, unopened and unexamined, would leave the question of "What if I threw away something precious?" and would feel unceremonious and disrespectful for items which were a big part of my life, even if a long time ago. This is one of the reasons I like the Konmari Method: you are required to touch, examine, and show gratitude to your things, even those you no longer need. I still kept a few things, though far fewer than before, and relaxed in the knowledge that I was no longer dragging around so much baggage.


## Results
So far, I have discarded a _lot_ of junk, but I still have miles to go. Surfaces in my room remain filled with daily items, personal treasures, and dust (hiss). Even with the space I have freed, I still need to designate a place for each item kept and put it away. Once _that_ is completed, I'll move on to digital clutter. Wish me luck!

Thanks for reading. :)