---
title: "My Konmari Experience 3: Overwhelm"
date: "Tue, Oct 30, 2018"
layout: post
---

Previous Installments:

- [Part 1: Clothes & Gifts]({% post_url 2018-10-27-konmari-1 %})
- [Part 2: Books, Papers, & Mementos]({% post_url 2018-10-28-konmari-2 %})

This is part 3 of my effort to "Put my house in order" _a la_ [_The Life Changing Magic of Tidying Up_](https://amzn.to/2yKsBll). Those readers who know me personally may have realized by now that I'm in the midst of my late-Autumn depressive spiral, and that my tidying efforts are a symptom. Let's talk about why:

$index{min_depth=2}

## Insidious Messes
Generally, my cleaning isn't scheduled. I clean whenever I have the time, and try to blast through as much as possible. Inevitably, as things pile up later in the year and I have less and less energy to do them, my living space becomes more cluttered, dusty, and entropic.

At some point, the messiness crosses a threshold, that I'll call the "Pennie can't stand this anymore" Line. My nose is continuously congested, my throat is dry, I have a cough, and simply _looking_ at any dusty surface in my home makes me panic.

It's funny. The things I do when I'm full of energy in the Spring in Summer set me up to fall hard when the depression comes. Maybe more intelligent habits & planning will help me in the long-term, I think, hence this _Konmari_ attempt. 


## Pagefaults
If my place is tidy and organized, it will take less energy to keep that way. If I _only_ have stuff I need, I will have enough physical "address space" for it. Let's pretend your living space is a computer:

Storage spaces form the SSD. Surfaces and floors are RAM. When you use something, you _load it into RAM_--your desk, your kitchen counter, your bathroom counter, etc., and when you're done with it, it goes back to its spot on the hard drive. This is a little unrealistic, since digital files don't have to be "put back", but bear with me.

What happens when you leave items "in RAM"? What if you leave _a lot of items_ in RAM? If you have too much stuff, it won't all _fit_ on the hard drive in a neat structure. So you store it permanently in what is intended to be _temporary_ storage space, such as _the floor_.

Eventually, you need to load something into RAM, say, a homework assignment, but your RAM is full--there's stuff all over your desk. So, now what? You need paging memory. So you take some stuff in RAM, which may or may not belong together, and you _shove_ it into storage somewhere. An Amazon box full of Tupperware, Astroglide, and soldering tips, why not?

Over time, your "files"--groups of things that belong together, are fragmented. Your desk and counters have become LRU caches--whatever you used yesterday is right here, but whatever you used before that is _who knows where_ in the pagefile and _good luck ever finding it_. Additionally, your performace slips, because you never have space in RAM to do anything.

> You need your stapler? _Pagefault._ Ok, wait, here it is. Now you need your pencils? _Pagefault._ Um... Where the Hell are--OH! Here they are. Uh... What were we doing, again? Why did we come in here? We should vacuum. But there's stuff all over your floor... I know! Let's make mac 'n' cheese.


## Being an HSP: Normal Reactions, But Extra
My environment has a strong effect on my mind and body. Trapped in an unbearably messy friend's house for the weekend? Dollars to donuts I'll be constipated when I come home. Maybe that's TMI, maybe that's too woo-woo for you. But it's true. And it sucks. 

When my own space has fallen to neglect, it's a sign that _I've_ fallen to neglect, too. My mess is a self-portrait, showing everyone my anxiety, forgetfulness, and sense of hopelessness, and it doesn't work like _The Picture of Dorian Gray_. Instead, I get my problems back with interest.


## College Students & Cleaning
Something I've noticed is true of _many_ anxious college students is that we clean under pressure, as a form of avoidance or procrastination, but also out of a desperate need for order. Exams coming up? Expect floor-scrubbing and a pristine sock drawer.

Why? Because your mind is running on empty batteries. You need order and peace to recharge, but instead, your body is on high-alert and _everything_ is an emergency. Unable to find peace or solace in your head, you naturally seek it externally, but cannot find it, instead finding a pile of laundry on the floor, dust everywhere, and a long list of responsibilities, all falling by the wayside as you spiral.

In the face of overwhelm, you turn to the most manageable tasks you can find, scrambling to feel some _progress_ and _order_. For many people, the most manageable tasks are housekeeping. Your home, like everything else, has snowballed into something daunting, but if you can _just_ get it clean, then _maybe_ the sanctuary of a clean living space will give you some rest. Maybe, just maybe, doing the dishes will make your term paper less intimidating. Maybe. Hopefully.


## Konmari is Overwhelming, Too
Imagine if you had to defragment your old PC's hard drive yourself, manually, by moving boxes around a warehouse. Of course, I don't live in a warehouse and I have comparatively few possessions, but it _feels_ like that.

Facing every possession I have kept buried is difficult. Some items are painful to remember, others are a reminder of my faults or poor judgment. Many things are sentimental. Ironically, it is very difficult to Konmari in a space that hasn't been Konmari'd yet--there's stuff everywhere. 

To go through my clothes, for example, I had to shuffle around lots of other stuff to make room for them. At an emotional baseline, this process wouldn't be so bad, but doing it in the midst of a Bad Time has made it vastly more burdensome.

But I have to finish it.
