---
title: "My Konmari Experience 1: Clothes & Gifts"
date: "Sat, Oct 27, 2018"
layout: post
---

The Konmari Method, designed by Japanese tidying expert Marie Kondo, is a worldwide fad. Like most worldwide fads, it makes big promises about improving your life. As skeptical (perhaps dismissive) as I can be of "woo-woo feel-good self help literature", I do like [_The Life Changing Magic of Tidying Up_](https://amzn.to/2yKsBll), and it has had a positive impact on me.

$index{min_depth=2}

## Some Background

In early 2018, with the help of a friend, I moved most of my belongings in several car-loads to a new apartment. It was the first time I would be living alone, and the first time I would be free of abusive relationships in my life, as well. There was no time to sort and discard items during the move. The seconds ticked by under the looming threat of an abuser returning home, and I and my friend worked in a frenzy, tossing things into boxes indiscriminately to be moved. Some items were too large to transport by car and had to be left behind, among them a whiteboard and the larger of my two bookshelves.

Finally having my own space, and finally being able to relax, should have meant that I could take immense joy in exercising control over that space. Instead, it took me weeks to unpack. Many boxes remained sealed and hidden, even after I moved to a different apartment in June, and _even_ after I moved to a different room _within_ that same apartment.

With each move, my possessions became a little more organized, sure, but I was still burdening myself with many things I didn't need, want, or use. So, fueled by cabin fever, anxiety, and Prozac, I decided to make another attempt at reducing: this time, for real.

## Why Reduce?
Each possession is a responsibility: you must store, care for, and maintain the item. Additionally, you must _transport_ it in the event that you move houses. 

### Storing Items
I am an undergrad student living in a shared apartment with _one bedroom_, a bathroom, and a couple kitchen cupboards as my personal space. In terms of _storage_, I live in a studio apartment, and space is at a premium. Storing items that I don't need is a significant waste of my rent!

Additionally, having inadequate space for all my stuff means that very few items have a "designated place". Instead, items are left wherever they fit after their use, every surface becomes cluttered with a slurry of miscellany, and I feel overwhelmed and anxious from simply _walking into my room_.

Cluttered surfaces are more difficult to clean, so the stress of items strewn about soon blossoms into revulsion at the dust coating them, the cat hair, and in the case of floors, the tracked dirt and debris.

### Caring for Items
Items buried in boxes and long forgotten do not last. Books and clothes become dusty, musty, and succumb to dry-rot. Electronics waste away, damaged by pressure, extreme temperatures, moisture, and dust accumulation. Notebooks and letters become jaundiced and fragile. And then you transport the coffins to which you've relegated these items to your new closet or attic: a mausoleum for things neglected. 

Possessions are meant to be used and handled. For possessions you _don't need_, this means handling, using, and doing maintenance, like cleaning or repairs, on items that you _don't even need or want_. How exhausting.

## The Hoarder's Dilemma
These shoes are at the end of their life: they are stained, the soles are becoming detached, the laces are frayed. I should throw them out. I will never wear them again... Right? But what if my _current_ shoes become ruined, and I'm too broke to get new shoes, and--

That won't happen. Throw the old shoes out.

I usually imagine hoarders as people who were young during The Great Depression, people so steeped in _real, immediate_ scarcity that they can never escape its threats. But it doesn't take extreme scarcity to push most of us to become "moderate hoarders".

Many of us--that is to say, millenials--live with economic insecurity, and many of us grew up with it as well. Maybe we didn't starve, but we raided our richer friends' snack drawers when there was little food at home. Maybe we didn't die of exposure, but we wore secondhand, ill-fitting clothes well past their expiration date. We weren't homeless, but the extent of our personal finance education was overhearing our parents cry, trying to budget. I don't know how this affected other people, but I:

1. Feel guilt about buying anything.
2. Feel guilt about receiving gifts.
3. Feel anxious when I discard anything that "might come in 
   handy".
4. Can almost _always_ envision a scenario in which a given item 
   "might come in handy".

Getting past these habits has been hard for me, and I'm still not great at knowing when to get rid of something. One useful technique is to ask: **"Is it more wasteful to throw this away, or to continue caring for it?"** Additionally, I find it helpful to remind myself that: **"I am not obligated to keep things. It is not my job to be a steward of every item or person that crosses my path in life. I am allowed to say "no". I am allowed to be happy."**

A common criticism of "the minimalism fad" is that it is a commodity packaged for the wealthy and privileged, and this criticism is fair, but misses the point: yes, the experience of poverty makes you more likely to hoard things, but this _doesn't mean that you should:_ Hoarding while poor means you will have an even harder time moving, a harder time storing things, and less free time to spend taking care of all the stuff you unnecessarily keep. Additionally, you will compound the stress of poverty by surrounding yourself with overwhelming clutter.

## Clothes
Marie recommends starting with clothes. With a clientele composed primarily of women, this makes sense. We tend to accumulate clothes more readily than most other items, and thus can feel the space saved by culling our wardrobes immediately, boosting morale as we dig into more difficult categories like books and mementos.

As a trans woman, I have a very personal relationship with my clothing. This meant that the _first_ time I tried to reduce my things in 2016, I had a difficult time discarding clothes, and kept many items I should not have:

- Cute blouses I bought on impulse, which never suited me.
- Jeans that didn't fit, but _would_ if I lost ~30 pounds.
- Socks with holes in them.
- Old shoes I would never wear again.

This time, with more self-respect, and the confidence to say "No", I fared much better. All of my clothes, for all seasons, now fit in my dresser. A small section of my closet holds bulky items, like coats, and delicate items. That's all.


## Bags
Marie includes luggage, bags, and purses within "clothing" items, but I am putting them in their own section because they are a "problem category" for me: I have _way too many_ bags. If I'm shopping and I find a cute bag for a cheap price, it's hard to resist buying it. I do this partly because finding personally expressive bags that suit me is _easier_ than finding clothes to serve that function. The problem with this is that I usually carry _the same items_ around with me, for which only a few of my bags are actually appropriate.

When every bag I own "sparks joy", how am I to choose any to discard, even if I don't have space or a use for some of them? I identified selection criteria. Each bag I keep must:

1. Be of good quality.
2. Match some of my clothes.
3. Be something I will actually carry.
4. Fit, at a minimum: 
	- purse: { phone, wallet, keys, knife, earbuds }
	- day bag: { {purse}, journal, laptop, wacom, water, 
	  chargers }

With these rules in place, I went through my bags again. I kept 8 bags and discarded 7. After storing most of the purses and day bags inside my overnight bag, I only had to put 2 bags back into my closet, where previously, there were 5.


## Product Boxes
To make space to move on to books and papers, I first needed to put away my bags. I ended up dealing with my collection of product boxes next. I often save product boxes, wrapping, manuals, etc., in case I want to resell an item later. However, I had habitually kept boxes for things that definitely would not be resold--the box for a phone I bought _as a gift for someone else_, for example, or my computer mouse, or a screen protector. In the end, I only kept 5 boxes, for cherished electronic items I may later resell in service of an upgrade.

I also had a large collection of Amazon boxes, which I used to store all the junk I never unpacked, or didn't have a real storage solution for. Most of those were also scrapped, as I now had more space to work with.


## Gifts
I had accumulated many items out of sheer guilt--they were gifts. I didn't use them, but it felt wasteful to throw them away. Giving the gifts to someone else would shift the burden of using them onto _that_ person, and most of them were items that could not be sold. Ultimately, I threw these items away.


## Moving Forward
Throughout the process of discarding, it amazed me how many discarded items had *barely* been used since they were bought, both items that I purchased and those that had been gifted to me. Konmari made me realize that I make too many small, impulsive purchases, based on imagined scenarios of their potential utility. I also realized that many of the gifts I receive are "shots in the dark"--I feel guilt for receiving the gifts because I know they will never be used, and will eventually be discarded.

### Impulse Buys
I need to be more aware of my emotional state, and question whether I actually need something before I buy it. It is too easy for me to get caught up in the thrill of finding something cute, and I need to work on that. 

Shopping for clothes, I should consider how an article would fit into my existing wardrobe, and I should try it on in the store, even though it makes me uncomfortable to do so. I shouldn't shop for any more fitness equipment--my building has a small gym, and I haven't used even used it. Spending money on good intentions is a good way to stay broke. I should not buy any more purses or day bags, for a _long_ time.


### Gifts
Earlier in life, I felt some resentment whenever I received poor gifts. Why had someone wasted their money on me? Why had they bought something I wouldn't even like, instead of just asking me? It felt as though people bought each other gifts in selfishness--giving the gift to feel good about _themselves_, rather than to give joy to the receiver, or worse, giving the gift to later hold it over the receiver as a _debt._

Going through my things thoroughly, and discarding what wasn't useful, made me realize that people in my life were _trying_ to give me joy through their gifts, but had _absolutely no idea what I would like._ Each discarded gift matched superficially with my interests or skills, which made sense, because I rarely share my interests with others, and often only _convey_ a superficial interest in them. Ironically, my habitual effort to fade away and be less of a burden is the very thing that made me _impossible_ to shop for. It wasn't that people didn't ask what I would like, but that I deflected the question or gave a minimizing answer. By not _allowing_ people to know me better, or gift me items that I wanted, I _ensured_ that their gifts would go unused.


## Summary
Yesterday and today I've made some real progress toward a less stressful living space, and made some unexpected discoveries about myself. [Next time](/posts/konmari-1.html), I'll cover my experience with books, papers, and mementos. The final part of the series will cover ways to apply the Konmari Method to _digital possessions._

Thanks for reading!