---
title: "My Konmari Experience 4: Peace & Quiet"
date: "Wed, Oct 31, 2018"
layout: post
---

- [Part 1: Clothes & Gifts]({% post_url 2018-10-27-konmari-1 %})
- [Part 2: Books, Papers, & Mementos]({% post_url 2018-10-28-konmari-2 %})
- [Part 3: Overwhelm]({% post_url 2018-10-30-konmari-3 %})

Yesterday, I finished applying the Konmari Method to my room and bathroom. This is the _first time in my life_ that I have _finished unpacking_ after a move--how crazy! I walked into my bedroom to get my keys (from a dish of "pocket items" in the top drawer of my endtable), as I was about to carry out the last of the night's garbage. 

Stepping into my room, seeing it clean and tidy, dust-free, dimly lit, soft bossa nova rippling gently out from my computer, nearly brought me to tears. A huge sigh escaped me, and I felt my entire body "let go"--tension I wasn't even aware of was suddenly obvious, even as it left. I later explained to my S.O. that my room felt "quieter", and that when I walked into it this time, it felt inviting, as though it were offering me a hug.

I didn't sleep particularly well last night, instead having nightmares and waking up frequently as I often do. I had the "teeth falling out" nightmare, which particularly gets to me most of the time. But, this morning, although I did wake up late, I felt at ease. 

Tired from nightmares, sore from my cleaning marathon, and still: I _felt_ like a morning person today, something that has slipped away in recent months. I got up cheerfully, brushed my hair and teeth, cleaned the litter box, swept, made coffee--in other words, had the 15-minute morning routine of a functioning adult, for the first time in **ages**. It didn't feel overwhelming. It didn't feel like a Sisyphean task. It was just... life. Normal life. How wonderful!

All that remains is to ensure that I _keep_ things tidy, which is now made as easy as possible: put things back after use, and spend ~20 minutes on routine, daily cleaning. In what is hopefully the _final_ part of this series, we'll talk about applying Konmari to digital life. 

Thanks for reading. :)